HIP-435 Record Stream V6 (#435)
hashgraph/hedera-improvement-proposal: HIP/hip-435.md

---
hip: 435
title: Record Stream V6
author: Stoyan Panayotov <stoyan.panayotov@limechain.tech>
type: Standards Track 
category: Service
needs-council-approval: Yes

> status: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
status: Draft
```

## User stories

As a Hedera user, I want the to have the ability to access verbose information about transactions.

As an operator of a mirror node, I want the ability to download and process only the most important record-related information.

As an operator of a mirror node, I want the ability to download all the information about records execution that a Hedera node can provide.

## Specification

Introduce a sidecar transaction record protobuf message and a sidecar record file protobuf message to enable tracking of additional information about records execution.

### TransactionSideCarRecord

`TransactionSideCarRecord` is a protobuf which will be used to create sidecar records complementing `TransactionRecord` and storing additional information about a transaction execution.
The `TransactionSideCarRecord`s created by Hedera nodes will be externalised in a new file, part of the new RecordStream structure described bellow.

```
message TransactionSideCarRecord {
    // Consensus timestamp will be the same as the consensus timestamp of the 
    // transaction the side car is related to. This offers a convenient 
    // way to match record to sidecar. 

>     Timestamp consensusTimestamp = 1;

Reviewer 2: So this is not a one-to-one index, correct?  We can have a sidecar message for storage change and then another sidecar message for contract actions?

Author: Yes, and both sidecar messages will have the same timestamp since they're related to the same transaction record.

    oneof {
      repeated ContractStateChange = 2; // Example sidecar type
      repeated ContractAction = 3; // Example sidecar type
      // Other future categories
    }
}
```

### Record Stream File Changes

A new version (V6) of the record stream file format will be created using the following protobufs:

```
message RecordFileObject {
  TransactionRecord record = 1;
  Transaction transaction = 2;
}

message RecordStreamFile {
  bytes startObjectRunningHash = 1;
  repeated RecordFileObject fileObjects = 2;

>   bytes endObjectRunningHash = 3;

Reviewer 2: The running hash only covers the fileObjects and there is no cryptographic integrity check for the side car files?

Author: The record signature file that is created for each record stream file signs the hash of the entire corresponding stream file. The list of sidecar file hashes is included in the record stream file. This way mirror nodes or any interested party can download the record stream file and all sidecar files and verify that:
1. repeated bytes SideCarFileHash is correct; 
2. the signature file signed the correct hash of the entire record stream file;

Added this to the HIP as well.

Author: I didn't want to add the list of sidecar hashes to the RecordFileObject itself in order to avoid requiring the mirror nodes to download that information as well.

  uint64 blockNumber = 4;

>   repeated bytes SideCarFileHash = 5; //allows multiple sidecar files to be linked to this RecordStreamFile

Reviewer 2: Do we want to identify which kind of sidecar file goes with which hash?  Perhaps a repeated struct with two fields, one is an enum (repeated?) of the kinds of data stored in that sidecar and then the hash?  

I don't think we want to bake the name in but I do think we want to bake in the kind of content it has. That way if we decide that contract actions are too much data we can only emit the state changes and put that in as part of the record stream?

Author: The way I figured this would work is:
The transaction and sidecar records themselves (e.g. `RecordFileObject` and `TransactionSideCarRecord`) will be created on the services side and sent to the platform in a `List<RecordFileObject>` and a `Map<int, List<TransactionSideCarRecord>>`. The `int` in the map will specify the type of the sidecar record and the list will be used to group all sidecars of the same type in the same file in a generic way. The platform will then create the files using the new protobufs `RecordStreamFile` and `SideCarFile` and put the int in each sidecar file name. This way in the future when we add new types of sidecars we shouldn't have to make a code change on the platform side. 
So if we wanted to stop externalising `ContractActions` for example we would just need to stop sending that type of sidecar records to platform through the map. We can even introduce feature flags for each type of sidecar and turn them off and on.

}

> message SideCarFile {

Reviewer 2: Do we want only one record per sidecar file?  Or is the sidecar file a stream of side car records?

Author: The SideCarFile will contain all sidecar records of a given type (e.g. ContractAction, StateChanges) that were produced during the same ~2s period that the record file was produced. In other words all the sidecar records relating to transaction records in the record file for that period. This also means that multiple SideCarFiles will be produced per RecordStreamFile - 1 for ContractAction sidecars, 1 for StateChanges, 1 for each new type of sidecar records we introduce in the future.

### Record Stream File Changes

A new version (V6) of the record stream file format will be created using the following protobufs:

```
message RecordFileObject {
  Transaction transaction = 1;
  TransactionRecord record = 2;
}
```

`Transaction` and `TransactionRecord` are already defined as protobuf messages and are used by the Record Stream algorithm. No changes will be required for these messages.

`RecordFileObjects` are serialized in record stream files.

```
message RecordStreamFile {
  // Running Hash of all RecordFileObjects before writing this file.
  bytes startObjectRunningHash = 1; 

  // List of all the record file objects from that period.
  repeated RecordFileObject fileObjects = 2; 

  // Running Hash of all RecordFileObjects before closing this file.
  bytes endObjectRunningHash = 3; 

  // The block number associated with this period.
  uint64 blockNumber = 4; 

  // List of the hashes of all the Sidecar record files created for the same period.
  // Allows multiple sidecar files to be linked to this RecordStreamFile

>   repeated bytes SideCarFileHash = 5; 

Reviewer 3: Instead of just a hash we should add the sidecar index and type information here so that clients can choose which files to download. This is preferable to having type information encoded in the filename. Potentially the index can be omitted and be inferred from the list position.

```suggestion
  repeated SidecarMetadata sidecars = 5; 
```

```proto
enum SidecarType {
  ContractStateChange = 1;
  ContractAction = 2;
  // Other future categories
}

message SidecarMetadata {
  bytes hash = 1;
  long id = 2;
  repeated SidecarType types = 3;
}
```

The record signature file that is created for each record stream file signs the hash of the entire corresponding stream file. The list of sidecar file hashes is included in the record stream file. This way mirror nodes or any interested party can download the record stream file and all sidecar files and verify that:
1. repeated bytes SideCarFileHash is correct; 
2. the signature file signed the correct hash of the entire record stream file;

```
message TransactionSideCarRecord {
    // Consensus timestamp will be the same as the consensus timestamp of the 
    // transaction the side car is related to. This offers a convenient 
    // way to match record to sidecar. 
    Timestamp consensusTimestamp = 1;
    oneof {
      repeated ContractStateChange = 2; // Example sidecar type
      repeated ContractAction = 3; // Example sidecar type
      // Other future categories
    }
}
```

`TransactionSideCarRecord` is a protobuf message which will be used to create sidecar records complementing `TransactionRecord` and storing additional information about a transaction execution. 

```

> message SideCarFile {

Reviewer 3: The `c` in Sidecar should not be capitalized. Need to adjust naming here and everywhere else.

```suggestion
message SidecarFile {
```

The `SideCarFile`s will be uploaded into a separate folder in the cloud bucket. Doing so will reduce the number of rows Mirror nodes have to search in S3, reduce S3 list response size, and avoid having to filter them out locally. Probably `recordstreams/record0.0.3/sidecar`.

### Record File Names

A record file name is created using a string representation of the Instant of consensus timestamp of the first transaction in the file using ISO-8601 representation, with colons converted to underscores for Windows compatibility. The block number will be appended to the record file name.

The nano-of-second always outputs nine digits with padding when necessary, to ensure same length filenames and proper sorting.

The sidecar record files will have the same format but will also include the number representing the type of sidecar records that make up that file. This provides an easy way for mirror nodes to download only those files that contain sidecar records they're interested in.

Examples of a record stream file name with corresponding signature file and sidecar record files:

Example 1:

> Record File (.rcd): 2020-10-19T21_35_39.000000000Z_432.rcd

Reviewer 3: This was resolved but I see no mention of compression in the updated HIP.

> Record File (.rcd): 2020-10-19T21_35_39.000000000Z_432.rcd

Author: There is a mention of this topic after the example file names:
"All record, sidecar, and signature files will be compressed."

> Record File (.rcd): 2020-10-19T21_35_39.000000000Z_432.rcd

Reviewer 3: Ah, there was a typo so my search didn't find it originally.

Sidecar Record File 1: 2020-10-19T21_35_39.000000000Z_432_1.rcd

> Sidecar Record File 2: 2020-10-19T21_35_39.000000000Z_432_2.rcd

Author: Actually, the `432` in this example isn't the sidecar type, it's the block number. Should we also drop the blockNo? The corresponding rec file is named: 
Record File (.rcd): 2020-10-19T21_35_39.000000000Z_432.rcd

> Sidecar Record File 2: 2020-10-19T21_35_39.000000000Z_432_2.rcd

Reviewer 3: Right, we don't need the block number in the filename since it's within the contents.

The record signature file that is created for each record stream file signs the hash of the entire corresponding stream file. The list of sidecar file hashes is included in the record stream file. This way mirror nodes or any interested party can download the record stream file and all sidecar files and verify that:
1. repeated bytes SidecarFileHash is correct; 
2. the signature file signed the correct hash of the entire record stream file;

```
message TransactionSidecarRecord {
    // Consensus timestamp will be the same as the consensus timestamp of the 
    // transaction the side car is related to. This offers a convenient 
    // way to match record to sidecar. 
    Timestamp consensusTimestamp = 1;
    oneof {
      repeated ContractStateChange = 2; // Example sidecar type
      repeated ContractAction = 3; // Example sidecar type
      // Other future categories
    }
}
```

`TransactionSidecarRecord` is a protobuf message which will be used to create sidecar records complementing `TransactionRecord` and storing additional information about a transaction execution. 

```
message SidecarFile {
  // Version of HAPI that was used to serialise the file

>   SemanticVersion hapiProtoVersion = 1;

Reviewer 3: Don't think this is needed since the parent RecordStreamFile has this info already

  fixed32 recordStreamFileVersion = 1;

  // Version of HAPI that was used to serialize the file
  SemanticVersion hapiProtoVersion = 2;

  // Running Hash of all RecordFileObjects before writing this file.
  HashObject startObjectRunningHash = 3; 

  // List of all the record file objects from that period.
  repeated RecordFileObject fileObjects = 4; 

  // Running Hash of all RecordFileObjects before closing this file.
  HashObject endObjectRunningHash = 5; 

  // The block number associated with this period.
  int64 blockNumber = 6; 

  // List of the hashes of all the sidecar record files created for the same period.
  // Allows multiple sidecar files to be linked to this RecordStreamFile
  repeated SidecarMetadata sidecars = 7; 
}
```

`RecordStreamFile` will be used to serialize all `RecordFileObject`s that are part of the same period into record stream files. Periods are intervals of `hedera.recordStream.logPeriod` seconds used to group `RecordFileObject`s into record stream files.
The block structure is similar to the current  structure of record files, block number and sidecars are new fields.

```
enum SidecarType {
  ContractStateChange = 0;

>   ContractAction = 1;

Reviewer 3: Another category we probably need right away is `ContractBytecode` to contain both the initcode and runtime bytecode.

  // way to match record to sidecar. 
  Timestamp consensusTimestamp = 1;
  oneof {
    repeated ContractStateChange = 2; // Example sidecar type
    repeated ContractAction = 3; // Example sidecar type
    // Other future categories
  }
}
```

`TransactionSidecarRecord` is a protobuf message which will be used to create sidecar records complementing `TransactionRecord` and storing additional information about a transaction execution. 

```
message SidecarFile {
  repeated TransactionSidecarRecord sidecarRecords = 2;
}
```

The `TransactionSidecarRecord`s created by Hedera nodes will be externalised in `SidecarFile` files grouped by the type of the records. Files will be created using the SidecarFile protobuf holding all the `TransactionSidecarRecords` of a same type (e.g. `ContractStateChange`, `ContractAction`) related to `RecordFileObject`s created for the same period.

The `SidecarFile`s will be uploaded into a separate folder in the cloud bucket. Doing so will reduce the number of rows Mirror nodes have to search in S3, reduce S3 list response size, and avoid having to filter them out locally. Probably `recordstreams/record0.0.3/sidecar`.

```
message SignatureFile {
  

>   // version of HAPI that was used to serialise this file.
>   int fileVersion = 1;

Reviewer 3: This wouldn't be related to HAPI version since that tracks services tags. Record file versions change at an infrequent rate. This would be set to 6. 

```suggestion
  // The signature file version that was used to serialise this file.
  int version = 1;
```
